1. Amazon EBS (Elastic Block Store)

EBS = Block-level storage (important exam point)
S3 = Object storage

Key Properties

Durable block storage for EC2 instances

Behaves like a physical hard drive connected to EC2

Persists independently from the instance (unless “Delete on termination” is enabled)

Can change size, IOPS, and volume type while the volume is in use (for modern instances)

Can attach multiple EBS volumes to a single EC2 instance

Volume & EC2 instance must be in the same Availability Zone

Multi-Attach supported only for specific volume types (e.g., io1/io2)
→ Allows the same EBS volume to attach to multiple EC2 instances

2. EBS Encryption
How Encryption Works

Uses AWS KMS Keys (Customer Managed Key or AWS Managed Key)

Uses AES-256 encryption (VERY IMPORTANT EXAM FACT)

Encryption is handled by EC2 host, not by the volume itself

What Gets Encrypted

Data at rest inside the volume

Data in transit between EC2 and EBS

All snapshots created from encrypted volumes

All volumes created from encrypted snapshots

Mixing Volumes

You can attach encrypted + unencrypted volumes to the same instance

How to Encrypt an Unencrypted Volume

Process:

Take a snapshot

Convert snapshot to encrypted using KMS

Create new encrypted volume from that snapshot

3. EC2 Key Pairs & SSH Access
What is a Key Pair?

A key pair = Private key (.pem) + Public key
Used to authenticate to EC2 via SSH.

AWS stores the public key

You store the private key

Private key replaces passwords → much more secure

VERY IMPORTANT EXAM POINTS

Anyone with your private key can SSH into your instance → Keep secure

NEVER upload private keys to GitHub

AWS CANNOT recover your private key
→ If lost, you must stop instance, detach root volume, modify authorized_keys file, etc.

When an EC2 instance is launched:
→ The public key is added to ~/.ssh/authorized_keys

Using SSH
ssh -i mykey.pem ec2-user@<public-ip>

⭐ Summary Table (Exam-Worthy)
Topic	Key Points
EBS Type	Block-level, persistent storage
Max Flexibility	Resize, change IOPS, change type while live
Multi-Attach	Attach one EBS volume to multiple EC2s
Encryption Algorithm	AES-256
Encryption Done By	EC2 host (not volume)
Snapshot Behavior	Encrypted snapshots → encrypted volumes
SSH Key Pairs	Public key stored by AWS; private key stored by you
Private Key Recovery	Impossible to recover
Authorized Keys	Public key added to ~/.ssh/authorized_keys
✅ PREDICTED SAA-C03 MCQs (High Probability)
MCQ 1

Which statement about EBS encryption is TRUE?

A. Encryption is performed on the EBS volume.
B. Encryption uses the AES-128 algorithm.
C. Snapshots created from encrypted volumes are also encrypted.
D. Encrypted volumes cannot be attached to unencrypted-instance types.

✔ Correct Answer: C

MCQ 2

You lose your .pem private key for an EC2 instance. What can you do?

A. Recover the key from AWS Console.
B. Reset the private key using EC2.
C. There is no way to recover the private key.
D. Call AWS Support to generate a new key.

✔ Correct Answer: C

MCQ 3

Which encryption algorithm is used for EBS volumes?

A. RSA-2048
B. SHA-256
C. AES-256
D. DES

✔ Correct Answer: C

MCQ 4

Which statement is TRUE about EBS volumes?

A. They are object storage like S3.
B. They persist even after the EC2 instance is terminated (if not configured to delete).
C. You cannot resize an EBS volume when in use.
D. They can be attached across different Availability Zones.

✔ Correct Answer: B

MCQ 5

What happens when an instance with a specified key pair boots?

A. The private key is stored inside the instance.
B. The public key is placed into the authorized_keys file.
C. The key pair is regenerated automatically.
D. You must manually upload the key.

✔ Correct Answer: B

MCQ 6

Which EBS feature allows a single volume to be attached to multiple EC2 instances?

A. Multi-Read
B. EFS
C. Multi-Attach
D. Multi-Volume Linking

✔ Correct Answer: C

MCQ 7

A snapshot is created from an unencrypted EBS volume, then encryption is applied. What will happen to a new volume created from this snapshot?

A. It must be unencrypted
B. It will be encrypted
C. It depends on instance type
D. It will inherit encryption only if same AZ

✔ Correct Answer: B
